[AUDIO LOGO]
>> [BACKGROUND MUSIC] Now, when
we talk about sound healing,
how does it work?
>> Well, it depends
on the individual.
For me, it's all about
intention and awareness.
Sound is the nature--
one of the principles of
consciousness and the cosmos.
Sound is one of the elemental
forces of creation as spoken
through the mythos or
history of most wisdom
cultures of the world.
For me, mysticism is about
generating consciousness
in the higher
states of our being.
It's about coming into
an interstate of clarity
and purity in connection
with the whole
or different greater
aspects of the whole.
>> What are the three inner
jewels and the three hearts?
>> Three inner jewels are
stillness, silence, and space.
>>GEORGE NOORY: Well,
welcome to "Beyond Belief."
We've got a fascinating
program for you today.
Zacciah Blackburn is with
us, an international educator
of sound healing, a
sacred sound channel,
and a shamanic practitioner.
He is the founder and
director of the Center
of Light Institute of Sound
Healing and Shamanic Studies.
Zacciah, welcome to the program.
>>ZACCIAH BLACKBURN:
Thank you so much, George.
I'm very grateful to be here.
>>NOORY: What a fascinating
first name you have,
too, by the way.
>>BLACKBURN: Yes, yes.
>>NOORY: How long
have you had that?
>>BLACKBURN: Well,
as a young man,
I had guides from the
inner worlds come in
and start speaking to
me and directing me
in a new direction in my life,
and that first guide that came
was with me for
about four years.
And on his departure, in
a very critical moment
of self-identity,
he gave me the name.
I was literally calling
to the universe, who am I?
>>NOORY: What does it mean?
>>BLACKBURN: Well, it
means the purity of God,
and Zacciah is one of the
protectors of the higher
levels of the throne
of God, according
to the Kabbalistic
teachings that I've studied.
>>NOORY: How did you get
involved in sound healing?
>>BLACKBURN: As a young man,
I was given a bamboo flute,
and I became a flute
maker, making simple flutes
like bansuri of India,
shakuhachi of Japan.
And I started studying with
master teachers and musicians
of those cultures, learning
their inherent ways of wisdom
mixed with music,
contemplative, meditative,
and healing exercises.
And that, coupled with working
with contemporary teachers
and elders of
other traditions, I
fused a practice that is
part of the sound healing
culture, which has a wide array
of methodologies in the world
now.
Sound is the nature--
one of the principles of
consciousness and the cosmos.
Most wisdom cultures
of the world
understand this and
utilize emerging
of sound and consciousness
to bring forward intention.
We have tremendous creative
potential within us.
Sound is one of the elemental
forces of creation as spoken
through the mythos or
history of most wisdom
cultures of the world.
>>NOORY: Now, when we
talk about sound healing,
how does it work?
>>BLACKBURN: Well, it
depends on the individual.
For me, it's all about
intention and awareness.
It's about coming into an inner
state of clarity and purity
in connection with the
whole or different, greater
aspects of the whole and
bringing that forward
with the voice while creating
an elemental field of sound
with a simple tool, like a
crystal bowl or a native drum
or something like that.
>>NOORY: We're going to get
into some of this later on, too.
>>BLACKBURN: Yes.
>>NOORY: The principles
of sound healing are what?
>>BLACKBURN: Well, it
depends on who's working.
Some people will just play
crystal bowls and say relax,
and they have beautiful
tones and harmonies
that create neurological
pathways of relaxation.
>>NOORY: And so is it
like a tuning fork?
>>BLACKBURN: Tuning
forks are part of it,
and there's a lot of
studies about tuning
forks and their work
with mood disorders.
MIT is doing studies on
particular binaural beat
patterns and the potential for
healing Alzheimer's, and people
who are working with
tuning forks for that.
But I don't go the
scientific route.
I studied with master elders
of different traditions,
and I use a more intuitive way
of connecting to inner guidance
and bringing forward the sounds
that they help generate, mostly
with my voice.
And it's coupled with intention.
What is it we want to do?
What is healing in
the first place?
>>NOORY: Exactly.
>>BLACKBURN: And if I'm with a
class of 20 students and I ask,
what is healing, I may have
20 different responses.
To me, healing, when you follow
it back to the root of origin,
it's about establishing a
connection with our wholeness,
and that follows back
further to establishing
a connection with our holiness.
And that works with many
traditions from the East
that talk about our pure
states of consciousness,
our pure nature, to the West,
and that's really the guiding
principles for myself.
>>NOORY: Zacciah, how long
does it take to heal somebody
with sound, generally?
>>BLACKBURN: Well, we have
to start with what is healing
and what the
intended outcome is.
I consider myself more a
facilitator in a practice,
and I try to empower people to
discover their own innate self
and bring that forward in
their lives in ways that
help them integrate and
find meaning and fulfillment
within their life.
>>NOORY: How important is
the brain to all of this?
>>BLACKBURN: I think it's more
at a soul or spiritual level
than the brain, but certainly,
the brain interacts.
And it's been shown through
science that different sound
practices calm the frontal lobes
and activate different aspects
of other parts of the brain
that are more intuitive or more
spacious oriented, the
occipital regions, for instance.
And you become more
receptive, and it's
more easy to enter into a more
meditative or intuitive state
to work with the sound and
the intentions involved.
>>NOORY: Do you do sound
with your voice, too?
>>BLACKBURN: My voice is
a primary tool in my work.
I use tools like this to create
what I call a field of sound.
It creates an envelope in
which we can work with,
and then I call
upon my inner guides
and ask for help and
guidance in the work
that we're doing,
what the intention is.
And my voice is
hopefully connected
to those relationships that
I have in the inner world.
>>NOORY: What is a
mystical experience?
What's that mean?
>>BLACKBURN: Well, I think
that depends on who you ask,
but for me, mysticism is
about generating consciousness
in the higher
states of our being.
In our daily lives, we tend to
overlook the greater aspects
of self, whereas in mystical
or world spiritual traditions,
working with the nature of
the true aspects of the self
in relationship to the
greater aspects of the cosmos
is fundamental to
the work that we do.
>>NOORY: Interesting, and
sound and mystical experiences
go hand in hand?
>>BLACKBURN: Well, yes.
I mean, what culture
can you think of,
whether it's Tibetan Buddhism
or Native American shamanism
or Christian
mysticism, that are not
using sacred chant, sacred
instruments with their rituals
and their ceremonies to heighten
the experience for the people
working?
>>NOORY: Well, exactly
as you've said,
Gaia's program,
"Sound of Creation,"
discusses how sound can
facilitate this kind of altered
states of consciousness.
>>BLACKBURN: That is
a beautiful program,
and it's one of the
few programs that I've
watched in which the
teachers are really
giving the great instructions
in information regarding sound.
I really--
>>NOORY: Let's take a look.
>>BLACKBURN: --appreciate it.
[PEACEFUL MUSIC]
>>NARRATOR: Various
brain states can
be achieved by stimulating the
entire brain using a technique
called brain entrainment.
>>JEFFREY D. THOMPSON:
I can expose you
to a sound that's pulsing
at a brainwave speed.
[DRUMMING AND CHANTING]
And your brainwaves will
try to time themselves
to this drumbeat
because it's the most
dominant one in my
environment, and that's
called brainwave entrainment.
>>NARRATOR: Ancient
spiritual leaders
likely used brain entrainment
to guide individuals
into expanded states
of consciousness.
[DRUMMING AND CHANTING]
>>THERESA BULLARD: In
ancient shamanic cultures,
they used to have the
drumming or the didgeridoo.
[DIDGERIDOO BLOWING]
The shaman would create a
certain rhythm with the drum,
like a heartbeat
rhythm, for example.
[DRUMMING]
>>THOMPSON: You'll see that
the speed of that drum beat
is about 5 hertz.
It's sort of like--
[RHYTHMIC CLAPPING]
--hey, hey, hey, hey, hey.
That is about 5
hertz right there,
and that means that I'm tapping
the drum at a brainwave speed
called theta.
Theta is where
your brainwaves go
when you're dreaming
in sleep, and that
means that if I start
pounding this drum,
your brainwaves, which are
awake in beta function,
will slow down and cross over
the borderline into alpha
at about 13 hertz, 12,
11, 10, 9 and finally
get down to this 5 hertz
in theta and lock onto it.
>>BULLARD: And this
would then take them
into an altered state, and they
would go on a shamanic journey,
for example.
>>THOMPSON: And if I
speed the drum beat up,
my brainwaves will follow.
If I slow it down, my
brainwaves will follow,
and we can see all this on EEG.
>>NOORY: It's a
fascinating science.
>>BLACKBURN: Well,
absolutely, and as I said,
there's a great deal
of science around it.
And brain state
technology is one
of the most researched sciences
in the field of sound healing.
There's more than 50
or 60 years of research
in exactly what they
were sharing with us.
And the shamanic beat pattern
of 4 to 7 hertz, the cycle,
is a standard method used
in contemporary shamanism,
but the elders I
studied with never
spoke of beat
patterns or anything
like this outside of a
couple of basic beats
but not like the five beats a
second or seven beats a second.
There's probably more science
on drum patterning and brain
states than in most of the
other areas of sound healing.
But again, my expertise comes
more from direct lineage
transmission, oral teachings
with master elders,
and so forth of
various cultures,
and the science wasn't really
there when I began, either.
And I was drawn so
into the experiences
I was having with the
fundamental technologies
of shamanic cultures that
I never really advanced
my knowledge as well as I might
have in the scientific fields.
Science has now caught up and
is doing tremendous things
with sound and healing.
I mentioned MIT and their
studies with binaural
patterning that seems to enhance
learning and memory in mice
and build up a protein in the
brain that eats the plaque that
is causative to Alzheimer's.
I love that research, but
it's beyond my expertise.
>>NOORY: You brought
some instruments
and some sound-creating devices.
Let's go through each one.
Let's start with this one.
>>BLACKBURN: Sure.
Well, this is a Native
American-style drum.
This particular drum is a
modern drum made by Remo,
and I brought it because--
>>NOORY: Hold that up.
>>BLACKBURN: I
brought it because it
will hold its same sound no
matter what the environment is.
Natural drums will
get loose or sharp
according to the humidity,
and I didn't know what
conditions I would be in.
So this drum has
a specific sound.
I wanted to be sure
I had that sound.
[DRUMMING]
But in the mystical
traditions of the elders
I studied with, the drum itself
represents the wheel of life.
This is the great mother.
>>NOORY: Interesting.
>>BLACKBURN: I'm
holding it in my hand,
and this is the masculine
principle of life.
We can see from its form that
we could imagine that as such,
and when you wield
the two together,
you literally are engaging
in an act of creation.
>>NOORY: Do you chant with
this or anything like that?
>>BLACKBURN: I do?
>>NOORY: Do it.
Go ahead.
>>BLACKBURN: OK.
[DRUMMING AND CHANTING]
>>NOORY: Now, that
sounded Native American.
>>BLACKBURN: I'm influenced a
great deal by Native teachings,
but it depends on
what I'm working with,
who I'm working with in
the inner worlds as to what
types of sounds come out.
>>NOORY: Now, by doing
what you've just done,
what is that supposed to do?
>>BLACKBURN: Well, again, it
depends on your intentions,
but my intentions are to
connect with the holy ones
of the other worlds
that I work with
and just be a vessel, a
channel for their voices
and their energies.
>>NOORY: Let me try this.
>>BLACKBURN: Sure.
[DRUMMING]
>>NOORY: Just like that?
>>BLACKBURN: Yes, it's
a beautiful voice.
>>NOORY: If someone's sick,
they just do this by them?
>>BLACKBURN: Yes.
>>NOORY: You can
feel the vibration.
>>BLACKBURN: Yes.
It's an extraordinary
instrument,
and I wouldn't know a
culture around the world that
did not use a frame drum as
a foundation of their work.
>>NOORY: What else
did you bring us here?
>>BLACKBURN: Well, I'd like to
end with this one if I could,
but this is a Tibetan
bell and vajra.
And these also
represent the divine
masculine and feminine
aspects of spaciousness,
which the bell, if you
were to just listen to it
and follow the sound, it
tends to just draw you out,
just to open you, and go
into open spaciousness.
>>NOORY: It's got a
sweet sound to it, too.
>>BLACKBURN: And
this is considered--
the vajra is considered
the diamond light,
the fundamental principle that
cuts through all obstacles.
>>NOORY: And what do
you do with that one?
>>BLACKBURN: Well, you just spin
it in prayers for the benefit
of others, just to ask
for those obstacles--
>>NOORY: Does it make a sound?
>>BLACKBURN: No.
Well, some people
have struck the bell.
I've even seen people--
this one won't do it
because it's too small,
but you can ring the bell this
way, also, by going around it.
And then the rattle is
a very beautiful one,
and elders in the
Cherokee tradition
taught one of my
dear friends who
makes rattles that this also
represents the great feminine.
This is the whole
of life, and this
is the masculine principle.
And when you shake, you're
seeding the principles of life
into creation.
So it requires the
practitioner who
understands this to go into
a great quality of integrity
and responsibility.
What is it that
I want to create?
What is it that I want to
bring forward in the world?
If I understand that every sound
is making a sound of creation,
I'm working with
literally with the voices.
>>NOORY: It's got a
different sound to it.
>>BLACKBURN: Yes.
And so what's an
elder doing when
he's working there whether
it's one or in ceremony
with the community?
Could I do a simple sound
here, also, perhaps, just
voice for a moment?
[RATTLING]
Is that OK?
>>NOORY: Yeah.
>>BLACKBURN: OK,
and those listening,
I would just ask you to go
into this inner spaciousness
in your own heart and imagine
that the holy ones are just
bringing blessings
into your life.
[RATTLING AND CHANTING]
>>NOORY: Were you
speaking words?
>>BLACKBURN: No.
>>NOORY: Just sounds.
>>BLACKBURN: I'm connecting
with sounds of the feeling
states that are generated in
relationship with the unseen
beings that I work with.
>>NOORY: Now, you would
use that for ailments
and things like that?
>>BLACKBURN: I don't tend
to work with physiology.
I tend to work with
spiritual development.
>>NOORY: What's the difference?
>>BLACKBURN: That's
a very good question,
and we could talk about the
interrelationship of mind,
body, spirit, certainly.
But from the earliest
aspects of my own work,
I was taken into altered
states of seeing the greater
whole of universal
consciousness and wanting
to develop ways and
methods of understanding
what I was experiencing and
how to enter and sustain
those states of
wholeness and well-being.
And again, that's spoken
about by culture upon culture,
whether I'm speaking Tibetan
Buddhism and the nature
of self-realization,
or I'm talking
about Peruvian mysticism
and the nature of awakening
the seed of our
potential to become
a flower of blossoming
joy and service
to the garden of creation.
Culture upon culture speaks
about a similar understanding
of the nature of reality that's
far more than what most of us
fix our attention upon, and we
tend to get lost and confused
and in doubt and so
forth because we're not
paying attention to the
greater potential within us
and our connection to
the greater cosmos.
>>NOORY: Tibetan monks use
this a lot, don't they?
>>BLACKBURN: Absolutely.
Absolutely.
I mean, there's not a chant
that they do that doesn't--
I mean, I've been
in a ceremony where
there are 20 or 30 monks playing
the bell, another 20 playing
drums, another 5 or 10 playing
Tibetan horns that are anywhere
from 3 to 18 feet long, and
they're all joining together
in the sound ceremony.
But then all of the
monks in the chamber
are chanting some of
their great chants
that are aligning
with the holy ones
and inviting their blessings
for the benefit of all beings.
>>NOORY: And now, do they
chant when they use this?
>>BLACKBURN: Absolutely.
[RINGING BELL]
>>NOORY: Do they om?
>>BLACKBURN: Well, om is--
there are three
sacred sounds that I
was taught that are associated
with enlightened states
of mind, heart, and speech, pure
body, pure speech, pure mind.
And om-ah-om are those.
So I was taught practices
known as the three lights
practice that brings in
awareness into the pure states
of the third eye,
the pure states
of the throat or pure
speech, and the pure states
of the heart of
compassion or the body.
And you would just sit
there, moving your awareness
through these light
principles emanating out
of these centers
of consciousness
and just chanting.
[CHANTING AND RINGING]
It's about developing
an understanding
of the innate states
that are already there.
>>NOORY: You have a
soothing voice, by the way.
>>BLACKBURN: Thank you.
I appreciate that-- so the
innate states of goodness
and what's known as the three
inner jewels of spaciousness,
stillness, and silence that,
if we just rest in those,
are self-nourishing,
self-liberating, self-luminous.
They bring out the luminous
nature of our self.
Modern science is
showing us how,
at a cellular level, that
we are luminous beings,
and that when we enter
states of coherence,
that builds that luminosity.
The ancients understood
this by direct experience,
and they teach methods
that have been around
for thousands of years that have
enhanced the lives of thousands
upon thousands of people.
In one of your own
programs, I heard
someone talking about
180,000 or 300,000 people
who had entered the
rainbow body experience
through the sacred practices
of Tibetan Buddhism.
Why would we not
want to understand
the nature of fulfillment of our
self, our true purpose in being
here, and attain to that
the best that we can?
>>NOORY: What is your
definition, Zacciah,
of well-being?
What is a well-being person?
>>BLACKBURN: Well,
to me, well-being
takes me right into that
state of wholeness which
demands of us to understand
the principles of the nature
of self in relationship to
the principles of the cosmos.
It's about self and cosmos,
but self is capital S.
And wellness and
well-being-- most of us
focus on the little
s, the little self,
and we're out
diving in to trying
to find the best relationship,
the best housing, the best job.
We're expending our energy in
these horizontal directions
in our life when we should
be developing techniques
to grow and blossom in
relationship to the greater
whole.
And that follows the
principles of energy,
whether we're looking at
yoga or other cultures,
like the Shoshomna,
the central channel,
the djed in Egyptian mysticism,
the way in which we build
life force connecting
to the Earth,
building it up through
our chakra system,
although that has different
names in different cultures,
and bridging up into the
cosmos, making that connection
and being a sacred channel.
In Peruvian mysticism, it's
called a [NON-ENGLISH],,
becoming a pure
channel of light.
>>NOORY: I remember back
in the '60s and '70s,
the Hare Krishnas
would sing and chant,
and for a long time,
Zacciah, I thought
there was something
wrong with these people.
>>BLACKBURN: Yes.
>>NOORY: Now, the older
I get, I realize they
were tuned in, weren't they?
>>BLACKBURN: Well,
they definitely
have something going,
and I remember,
very early in my
time, when I had
a simple bag of bamboo
flutes, walking around
the streets of the city.
And they would grab
me and say, come on,
we're going to do kirtan.
And I'd go, what's kirtan?
They wanted me to
play with them.
They didn't know how well
I could play a flute,
but I had no idea at the
time what kirtan was.
>>NOORY: I thought you're
good with the flute.
>>BLACKBURN: Flute is one
of my primary instruments.
>>NOORY: That's fantastic.
Now, how do we
perceive something
that may be part of reality?
>>BLACKBURN: Well,
the three states
of what's called the
inner jewels I just
spoke of from Tibetan Buddhism
are amazing practices to do.
And all you do is go into
the heart or third eye,
and you just go into a state
of feeling spaciousness,
stillness, or silence.
And we all can do that.
If we have trouble
experiencing the felt sense,
we can recall a time
in which we felt it.
Imagine yourself out in
one of the fields here
on one of the mountains
during the daytime, certainly,
but at night with the vast
field of stars around you,
and you can feel
the beauty of that
and imagine that
those are principles
of light of the cosmos.
And you just expand
out into them.
So you go into a deep feeling
sense of vast spaciousness,
and you just rest there.
The masters will
tell you that just
by resting in one of these
three principles of stillness,
silence, or space that it
creates a nest that you can
rest in that is self-nourishing,
self-liberating,
and self-luminous.
What we've discovered is
that it's far more than that.
First of all, if you're
in open spaciousness,
you can't be in stress.
You can't.
The two can't co-mingle,
so physiologically, it
can help us with that.
But space-- science will tell
us it's the only thing that
connects all things,
and the Tibetans
will tell us that it's
the fundamental nature
of the great mother of all life
from which all life springs.
So just by being in space,
all of this is occurring.
What I found is that
mystically, shamanically,
that you're literally
connecting through the doorway
to that great mother of
life, and so great potentials
can come.
You literally can enter into
other dimensional states
just by resting in vast
space in the heart.
>>NOORY: Let's take a
look at our friend Gregg
Braden from Gaia's
"Missing Links"
as he talks about a lot of this.
>>BLACKBURN: Beautiful.
>>GREGG BRADEN: Fractal
patterns repeat again and again
on different scales.
You and I already know that.
You know that when you have
a pattern in your life,
when you have a pattern
in your relationships,
and you are with one
person, in one job
with one company in one city
and things aren't working well--
how many times have
you seen people
that say, OK, I need a change?
So they go to another city.
They find another partner,
another job, another company,
but they find that the same
patterns are showing up
in their lives again
and again and again.
And they say, well,
I didn't choose well.
Let me make another change,
another city, another job,
another company,
another partner.
How many times do we do
this before we realize
that no matter where we
go, the same patterns are
going to show up in our lives
again and again and again?
Now you know the reason.
The reason is because we
are living fractal patterns
in our biology.
We're living fractal
patterns in our emotions.
patterns in our relationships
because the energy of our
simulation, the information
of our simulation is
governed by the fractal code,
that fractal formula.
And the beauty of
knowing this is,
once we change that variable,
once we shift the way we think,
the way we solve our
problems, the way
we think of ourselves, once
we change our self-esteem,
once we change the way we
value our lives or the way
we value other people, that's
the equivalent of changing
the variable in the code.
Now we're writing a new
code, and the new patterns
are going to repeat again
and again and again.
If they're healthy patterns,
that's a really good thing.
So I'm illustrating how
our experience is actually
following the code that governs
the energy and the information
of our entire simulation.
This is a very,
very powerful way
to think about our
lives and our world
and what we're experiencing
in our virtual reality.
Now that we understand
the simple mechanism that
allows our simulation to sustain
itself, the fractal code,
it makes perfect
sense that we would
have the inner tools to
master our simulation in order
to live the best lives and to
create the best world possible.
>>NOORY: He's right on.
>>BLACKBURN: Absolutely,
beautifully spoken.
>>NOORY: He's right on.
>>BLACKBURN: And he's a master
teacher with great knowledge
about all of this.
If I could speak a moment
on a practical application--
>>NOORY: Please.
>>BLACKBURN: --about what I was
just saying, if we just go back
to experiencing spaciousness
in the heart, what we are doing
is creating the state of
what's known as clear view.
So we're dissolving
those patterns
that he's talking about.
We're dissolving the entangled
emotions and belief systems
that are not based in reality.
Just resting in space, we
develop a sense of clear view,
and so we can see
everything more clearly,
including our own lives.
And we can use that in
practical application.
Just by going into
clear view, it
helps us to make clear choices
followed by clear actions.
But if we have a confusing
state of something going on
in our life-- should
I move to Chicago?
What should I do
with my next job--
we can go into clear view
through just entering
spaciousness and draw that
life situation in and now
see it clearly and ask
the question, what's
my best choice here?
How can I best be of service
to my own higher purpose?
And it's stunning that part
of the wisdom of the teachings
is that self-wisdom is
generated through this,
and you see that you hold
much more wisdom than you
might give yourself value for.
And this allows us to truly see
how to take steps in our lives
that will better it.
>>NOORY: That's interesting.
>>BLACKBURN: Yes.
>>NOORY: When we realize
what's happening in our lives,
does it make us better people?
>>BLACKBURN: Well, I think so
because that's our inherent
nature, and we have
learned as a society--
and that's worldwide--
to fix our attention
on a very narrow
sense of values,
a very narrow sense of purpose,
and a very narrow sense
of reality.
Reality functions at
multi levels of dimension
and frequency, and if I were
thinking scientifically,
we're looking at a very
small frequency of reality.
It's not that what
we see isn't real,
but there's such a vast
amount of reality around us
that we're not
paying attention to.
And so it's beyond our belief
because we haven't experienced
it, and we've grown up in this
very limited sense of belief
and emotion, et cetera,
and life purpose
and definition of who we are.
Most of us define ourselves
by, oh, I live here.
These are my children.
This is what I do for work,
and this is my family.
But who we are goes far
beyond this time and space.
It connects, actually, to a
much deeper dimensional state
of all time and space.
We've been here
many lives before.
We bring much wisdom to
us from those other lives.
Many of us will meet a set
of teachings or a teacher,
and a pattern will open in us.
We're like, what is that?
>>NOORY: Freak us out.
>>BLACKBURN: Why am
I called to this?
>>NOORY: And it freaks us out.
>>BLACKBURN: It
can freak us out,
but there are key codes
of patterning awaking us
from the teachings of different
lineages and things like that.
Hey, perhaps I was a master
teacher in Tibet or Greece
or Egypt some time ago,
and I hear teachings
from that lineage.
And it awakens something
in me that I'm carrying,
and I don't realize it.
It's part of me.
And I don't value that
I've been here before,
and I carry much
wisdom within me.
>>NOORY: It appears to
me that the sound healing
is a small facet
of what's going on.
The rest is up to us, isn't it?
>>BLACKBURN: Well, what's
up to us is very important.
I mean, sound healing is a
small part of our culture,
and it's not necessary.
I by no means promote
it as a necessity.
I have found great
value when we understand
the principles of
sound in relation
to the principles of creation
to generate greater states
of fulfillment and well-being.
But really developing
a sense of who we are,
whatever methodology we use,
whatever path we follow,
is what's foremost, so we
need to really understand
who we truly are as
a spiritual being
and really have a
sense of our connection
to the greater place than
just this local place
that our small self lives in.
>>NOORY: What does reality
mean to you, Zacciah?
>>BLACKBURN: Well, reality
is beyond our imagination.
I listen to the Tibetan
teachings of this,
and they have a beautiful
way of expressing it.
And they talk about the
text and the teachings
that they say are the
attempt to articulate
that which is not articulable.
But true reality is that
which is not articulable.
It can only be
experienced directly.
And then they give you practices
like spaciousness in which you
can go into deep,
direct experience,
and then that brings
you an understanding
of the nature of reality.
>>NOORY: Dr. Bruce Lipton is a
genius when it comes to this,
and he talks about how
your state of consciousness
can affect your physical
health and life.
>>BLACKBURN: Yes.
>>BRUCE LIPTON: A
spontaneous remission
is a change in the
belief system, a change
in the consciousness, and
this is profoundly important,
because this is where we have to
understand the control of life
comes from.
What is your consciousness?
Are you envisioning a
healthy, happy life,
or are you concerned that
running in your family
is cardiovascular
disease or diabetes?
The point is very simple.
What image you hold
in your consciousness
is translated into a
physical expression.
You can absolutely
change your life
by changing your
consciousness because this
is the foundation
behind epigenetics,
and this is a story of
how vibration will also
select our genes
and the character
of that genetic expression.
The insights offered
by quantum physics
really reveal the whole story
about how our consciousness is
creating our life experiences.
If I go back to 1930 just
after quantum physics came
into the world of
science, I wanted
to leave you with a quote
from Sir James Jeans.
"The stream of
knowledge is heading
towards a
non-mechanical reality.
The universe begins to look
more like a great thought
than like a great machine.
Mind no longer appears to
be an accidental intruder
into the realm of matter.
We ought rather hail it as
the creator and the governor
of the realm of matter."
And to follow that
up, at the same time,
Sir Arthur Eddington,
another physicist, wrote,
"It is difficult for the
matter-of-fact physicists
to accept the view that the
substratum of everything
is a mental character."
These two physicists
are actually
giving us the most important
conclusions of quantum physics,
that mind and consciousness
and energy fields
are what shape our
life experiences.
And when we understand
that, then he says,
well, if you want
to change your life,
you don't have to do
anything physical,
but you do have to do
something in regard
to your consciousness.
So in conclusion, what
does this mean for you?
The quality of
life is profoundly
influenced by energy.
When energy waves
interfere with each other,
they may express
constructive interference
that enhances life energy or
destructive interference that
actually cancels life energy.
To learn how we can
control our consciousness
and manifest the
life we desire, it
is first necessary
to understand how
cells manage environmental
signals and controlling
behavior and genetics.
>>NOORY: Well,
he's spot on, too.
>>BLACKBURN: How
beautifully spoken.
Absolutely.
>>NOORY: By god.
>>BLACKBURN: Absolutely,
you've chosen some great spots
to put in there about it all.
>>NOORY: They're
good people, too.
>>BLACKBURN: Yes.
So he was talking about
consciousness and energy,
and in my own world
understanding,
these are the two primary forces
of male and female reality
that merge like the Sri Yantra.
The Shiva-Shakti union
from the Hindu culture
shows this merging
of consciousness,
which is exhibited through
the nature of Shiva,
the male principle, and Shakti,
the female principle of life
force.
And when they merge,
all life is manifest,
and of course, in
the Hindu tradition,
it's manifest through
the sound of om,
which represents that expression
of all creative manifestation.
>>NOORY: What are the three
inner jewels the three hearts?
>>BLACKBURN: Three inner
jewels are stillness, silence,
and space, and I've learned
practices that fundamentally
put them usually
with either space
or stillness in the heart,
silence in the throat center,
and either stillness or
spaciousness in the third eye.
I've done practices going
both from the third eye down.
>>NOORY: Is it supposed
to make you feel better?
>>BLACKBURN: Well, it's
not about feeling better.
It's about getting
into states that
bring about our inherent
nature that allow us to really
experience our
connection to life
and the inherent good
qualities of our self
that arise when we still
the mind, when we let go
of the abhorrent beliefs
that are not based
in reality that we've been
taught about ourselves
and the entangled emotions
that get in our way
from all of our
life experiences,
all of the wounding and
doubt and other things.
I mean, Buddha
said that doubt is
one of the largest
forces that keeps us
from self-realization and
feeling the connection to life.
There are so many confusing
emotions that we get into.
We look at the world today,
and it's especially confusing.
It's important to find ways to
establish a sense of stillness
and stability within the
self, and these three jewels
are part of that.
>>NOORY: How have
you learned all this?
>>BLACKBURN: Most of it
has come about from--
I've been blessed in three ways.
I've had incredible
inner guides that
first came to me at a very early
age and have evolved over time,
and that brought me to
working with luminous teachers
of different traditions from
Native elders of North, South,
and Central America to Tibetan,
Hindu, and Christian mysticism.
>>NOORY: And they were all
willing to help, weren't they?
>>BLACKBURN: Well,
they're teachers
that are there for anyone
who wants to come to them,
for the most part, and I
graduated to each one of them
and learn different
principles from each of them.
But I also bring a
great deal of this
from who I am as
a spiritual being,
and I find it important
to find value in all three
of those aspects.
But I honor the many
teachers I've had.
I've been very blessed with
incredible wisdom brought
through their blessings.
>>NOORY: You seem
very enlightened.
>>BLACKBURN: Well, I
don't think of myself
as any different than
anyone else on the planet.
I see us, really, as all
the same and yet unique.
Indeed, the word "individual"
means indivisible.
We tend to think of it as
something and somebody who
is different when
they're an individual,
but it actually is the
indivisible component
of our self that is connecting
from and to all life.
And yet each of us
have a unique pattern
or imprint and potential
that we bring into this life.
And that we work
on that potential
to discover it if we have
not and find a path that
will help us come into
realization of that potential
is our ultimate goal and
purpose in being here.
And I've been
blessed in that path,
but I don't see it as any
different than any other,
at least not the
potential we all hold.
>>NOORY: Where do you
take this next, Zacciah?
>>BLACKBURN: I continue
as long as I can.
My intention is to be of service
to others to do the best I can.
My primary intention
when I'm in practice
is to be a vessel for
those who work with me.
If I can be an empty
channel, I'm doing great.
I remember very
early in my practice,
I was doing one-on-one
healing with somebody
on a massage table, doing
sound practices over them.
And my guides came in
and said, Zacciah, you
do really good work, but
if you just open the door
and get out of the way,
we'd really appreciate it.
>>NOORY: Please.
>>BLACKBURN: Yeah, and that's
pretty much been my practice
ever since.
Just open the door and
get out of the way.
>>NOORY: What is
the power of nature,
and how does that
tie in to this?
>>BLACKBURN: Well, nature--
we are part of nature,
and that's part of
our lost universe
is that we don't realize that
we are birthed from nature
and that nature is a direct
expression of creation.
And by going into
nature-- nature
is exuding all of these forces
and principles of creation
all the time, so when
we go into nature--
which you have a vast
resource here right
outside the door in Boulder.
When you go into nature,
you feel the resonance,
and you entrain
to that resonance.
It's very easy to go into
altered states, which
are really our true
state of pure resonance
that nature is always
exuding, at least where
it's been left alone
to do its own thing.
Nature just exudes
its beauty and joy.
And we go there,
and we feel that.
And if we'll just
kind of surrender
to the quality of
resonance we feel there,
it will help us come into our
own unique resonance, which
is part of nature and should
be connected to nature.
>>NOORY: What does
right relationship
have to do with this?
>>BLACKBURN: Right relationship
is a principle understood
by most cultures, whether it's
the Tibetan Buddhists, who
might define Dharma as
the nature of the greater
self in relationship to the
principles of the cosmos,
or the Peruvian mystics, who
would say that we will all
awaken when enough of us
come into right relationship
the living energies
of earth and sky,
or my Cherokee
elders, who would say
that by entering into right
relationship with the giving
and taking of all
life, we will enter
into harmony with all life.
This is culture upon
culture really speaking
about right relationship.
And I could say that it's
an intuitive understanding,
and yet there are principles
that abide within the cosmos
that it is our purpose to
come into alignment with.
And when we come in
to right alignment
with the principles of
creation, then we're
in right relationship.
>>NOORY: Do you deal with
sacred sites at all, Zacciah?
>>BLACKBURN: Oh, absolutely.
>>NOORY: And what
makes them so sacred?
>>BLACKBURN: Well,
"sacred" is a word
that actually means that which
we make as holy, but to me,
everything is sacred.
And I'm thinking of one of my
Tibetan teachers who would say,
once you honor
everything as sacred,
you will be in that
right relationship.
But sacred sites,
to me, are sites
that are either natural
Earth sites that
hold profound power and
potential for transformation
or are sites built by
different cultures,
mostly ancient cultures
but modern cultures
as well, that are
regarded as sacred or holy
by those cultures and
have very special energy.
The ancient peoples, as
Gregg very well knows,
understood this and
had a felt sense
of how to find and
locate natural Earth
sites of tremendous
power for transformation
and build their temple
complexes there.
And then they added to it
with their own consciousness.
>>NOORY: Right, and
their own creativity.
>>BLACKBURN: Absolutely,
and their wisdom.
And many of those cultures
understood the technology
of fusing their wisdom and
knowledge into the stones.
Stones hold memory.
They receive,
store, and transmit
energy and information.
That's almost a
direct quote from
my Peruvian mystical teachers.
Stones receive,
store, and transmit
energy and
information, and that's
exactly how our
modern culture works
with those little stones
in our phones and computers
and so forth.
>>NOORY: Several experts on
Gaia's "Ancient Civilizations"
show talked exactly about
what you just brought up.
>>BLACKBURN: Yes.
[PEACEFUL MUSIC]
>>MICHAEL TELLINGER:
Adam's calendar--
it is just another example of
ancient advanced technology
and knowledge of the
ancient civilizations
that we know very little
about and the capacity
to create machines.
And this is what people
need to comprehend.
When we're talking about
these ancient sites, all
of these ancient sites--
literally, without exception,
all of them were originally
constructed as machines.
They are not dwellings for
people or animals or cows.
All these ancient sites,
when you look at them
and you understand sound,
resonance, and frequency--
you understand cymatics--
it is very, very
obvious that all these ancient
sites have one thing in common.
The original purpose
was to generate energy.
And so there's not
really a difference.
It's just a different
way or a different means
of construction, having the
knowledge of sound resonance
and frequency, how to use
the natural frequencies
of the Earth, the
vibration of the Earth,
and turning it into
a very powerful
energy-generating device.
>>NARRATOR: If the
knowledge of sound
had the power to transform
the currents of the Earth
within these circles,
how did it work?
Gregg Braden explains
an important finding
at most of these sites.
>>BRADEN: When we look
at the materials that
are used to build some of the
most sacred sites in the world,
there's a common thread that
weaves all of these sites
together, and that is that
the stones that are used often
hold properties that influence
the human body in the presence
of those properties.
One of the most prolific is
quartz and the use of quartz
either in sandstone
or in granite.
What we see is a
kind of quartz that
is called piezo quartz
or piezoelectric quartz,
and this quartz has
the property that when
it is stressed, when it
is put under pressure,
it emits an electrical charge.
This is the kind of
quartz that is often
used in what's called
a quartz watch.
So when the spring
in the quartz watch
presses against that
little quartz crystal,
it emits enough of
electrical charge
that it powers the watch.
This is what's used
in these sacred sites
because there is an energy
in the pressure of the Earth
pushing against
the quartz grains,
releasing that electrical charge
in a way that can be felt when
a human walks into the site.
>>NOORY: It's truly
remarkable, isn't it?
>>BLACKBURN: It really is,
and what Gregg says, also,
in the science of it--
and some parts of it is
beyond my experience,
but my experience is directly
with the sites that here,
again, if we come into
right relationship,
if we come into resonance,
into a reverential
state in resonance
with the site,
we can actually
come into communion
with the wisdom keepers of
the site, the unseen beings
still there, holding the wisdom
of these ancient cultures.
And they will
collaborate with you
if you understand how to
enter in right relationship.
And those stones hold the memory
and wisdom of the teachers.
They've literally
taught me how to do--
>>NOORY: Fascinating.
>>BLACKBURN: --how to
work with the stones
to access those libraries
of knowledge which
are infused in many of these
ancient temple complexes.
>>NOORY: Zacciah, how do
people get a hold of you?
>>BLACKBURN: Well,
the best way is
to look at one of my websites.
Thecenteroflight.net is
our educational site,
and sunreed.com is
our instrument site
where we help people find
the best instruments for them
for the practices
they may want to do.
>>NOORY: As we wrap up, would
you give us one final chant?
>>BLACKBURN: Sure, absolutely.
[DRUMMING]
[DRUMMING AND CHANTING]
>>NOORY: Thanks for
watching "Beyond Belief."
[AUDIO LOGO]